Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Sam Carr. He's a
reader in the Department of Education at the University
of Bath. And today we're talking about his book,
All the Lonely People Conversations on Loneliness. So, Doctor
Carr, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thanks very much, Ricardo, and it's great to be
here.
So, let me start by asking you perhaps the
most basic question here. What is loneliness? What counts
as loneliness?
Yeah, I think that is a great question, and
The thing that I always start with when I'm
talking about this issue is What I have learned
at least from The many years that I've been
researching loneliness is that we think we know what
it is, but I don't think we really do.
Um, IF I have 100 people in front of
me, and each one of them tells me that
they feel lonely. We think they all feel the
same thing, but, but I'm pretty convinced that actually
they don't, and there are 100 different stories behind
what each of them means. And so in some
ways you could say loneliness has many, many different
faces. However, if there's anything that They're all talking
about that might be the same thing. It's a
sense of disconnection and longing in that person. But
what you don't know is, is what that really
means for that person and what exactly they're longing
for, and what that's rooted to. And I think
I, I go back to Carl Jung, who, who
used to say that when you've got any kind
of psychological, uh, label, whether that be, yeah, loneliness
or depression or anxiety. The label tells you very
little until you appreciate the story behind it for
that person. So, so the, the complex answer to
that question is there are probably. Thousands of definitions
of loneliness, and you really do need to appreciate
the story for the person before you have any
idea what that loneliness in that person is rooted
to, what they mean when they say they're lonely.
And I think that's where psychology often, and I
am a psychologist, often fall short in that we
think we're talking about something that's very easy to
define, a sense of disconnection, but actually that's rooted
to a story and. You never understand what that
means for a person until you hear that story.
So you got to dig and um. So for
me, yes, it's a sense of disconnection, and the
person is usually longing for something to alleviate that,
but you don't know what that is until the
story is told. Uh, AND, and in a way,
that's the whole point of my book, you know,
to, um, to, to, to get that to be
appreciated, that, that notion.
OK, but then, I mean, how do you determine
or do you determine that someone is lonely? I
mean, is it just the person telling you that
they are lonely or how does it work exactly?
Well, yeah, I mean, you've got, if you look
at the literature on loneliness, you will, you have
all of, again, it's so complex and gray, you'll
have people who might look at loneliness in a
very objective way, literally, as in. Do, do you
literally interact with anyone in the course of your
day, as in, and you, you literally could look
at people's patterns of movement and how much space
they have to themselves versus how many times they're
in contact with other people, etc. ETC. So that
could be quite an objective way of looking at
it. But then I think most people would agree
in the literature that it's much more about subjective
senses of loneliness, you know, so. Even if you
don't see anybody at all for many, many days,
you might not feel lonely at all. Um, CONVERSELY,
you might be in contact with many, many, many
people for 3 or 4 days, but feel incredibly
alone. So the subjective sense of isolation. I probably,
um, more the thing that we talk about when
we, when we are talking about loneliness more than
the objective sense, although it has been studied both
ways. Um, SO you can look at it objectively
and subjectively. Um, AND even subjectively though when people
say, yes, I feel lonely, what do they mean
by that is my point. Yeah, what do they
mean by that? You don't know that until you
dig.
Right, so loneliness is not the same as being
alone, or is it?
Not at all, no. There's, there's for a long
time, I think we've recognized the distinction between the
two. Yeah, being alone need not in any way
be accompanied by a feeling of loneliness, uh, the
sense that I am disconnected or isolated, or it
might be. But it it certainly isn't a given
that the two would always be accompanying each other.
I, I know from my own experience that being
alone is often the time I feel least lonely
in, in, in my, in my life, for example,
and there are reasons for that.
I, I mean, do we know if there are
any psychological traits that make people experience subjectively loneliness,
because we can find two different people in similar
circumstances and perhaps one of them feels uh lonely
and the other doesn't. Right.
Absolutely, yeah, that can be. Two incredibly similar situations
and yeah, in, in one person that can be
a real precursor for a feeling of loneliness, whereas
in another, not at all. Um, IN, in some
of my work, for example, on older people, you
know, towards, towards the end of life, uh, people,
people in the last, say, decade of life. I
have talked to people in very similar situations. For
example, they, it's quite common in old age to
lose things, so people might lose their, their long
term partner, their wife, their husband, who they've been
with for 50 years. Their children have grown up
and moved away to other countries. They don't have
a job anymore, so they don't have that identity,
etc. For some people, I've seen that result in.
A very, very devastating feeling of loneliness to that
person. There's nothing they feel they're connected to anymore,
yet others, um, in the very same situation do
not seem to, to experience that in any way
as a lonely situation. And I try to think
and try to understand, well, what's the difference between
those two people. It's difficult for me to say
a trait. I wouldn't say it's a trait per
se, more like how do they? How do they
understand the situation that they're in, and the people
that seem to find meaning in that situation have
something about them. I remember once talking to an
old woman, she said to me, I've lost my,
I'm not a mother anymore. My children have all
gone. I'm not a wife anymore. My husband died.
I don't, I'm not, I'm not a psychologist anymore.
She was actually a psychologist. But what I do
believe is that this part of my life where
I've had to cross this desert and lose everyone
and everything. Has actually allowed me to access parts
of me that I couldn't access before. So I
can now be, she said, the hermit who lives
in a cave. She was always in there, but
she could never come out when I was um.
When I was 30 or 40 or 50, so
she saw, saw old age and the wasteland that
some people sort of suffer in as an opportunity
for new growth. Why she saw it that way,
I'm not sure, but she had something about her
that enabled her to see her situation differently to
other people who've Seen flounder in the same situation,
you know. So I do think it's true that
there are qualities, but I wouldn't be confident enough
to say, yes, it's because of X trait or
Y trait. I wouldn't know what trait that would
be, but certainly there are some people who seem
to have a sort of resilience or a capacity
to relate to loneliness differently. They don't, it doesn't
floor them.
Yes, I was just wondering, of course, I'm not
sure if this has been studied in any way,
but I was wondering whether psychological traits like extroversion,
for example, would have any influence on And that
sort of subjective feeling of loneliness and maybe things
like, I don't know, attachment styles or something like
that.
I think, yes, and uh certainly you, you can
certainly see why people might think that. Some you
might, you might easily make the assumption that introversion
might, might make you more likely to feel lonely,
but I don't think that's necessarily true. Introverts actually
tend to be. People that are quite comfortable with
their own solitude because they're quite used to looking
inwards, whereas it can often be extroverts, not always,
who often find uh being alone is a time
where they might be more likely to feel lonely,
um. At the same time, I am an introvert
and I often feel like. The time that I
am least lonely is when I'm on my own
because I'm connecting to something in myself that really
makes me feel less alone, actually. The same is
true with attachment, of course, I think with insecure
attachment. The notion is often accompanied by a sense
that you need other people in order to feel
safe, you know, so there are lots of people
whose loneliness stems from a sense that without another
person around as a sort of comfort blanket, I'm
not safe. And so therefore, I feel terrified and
alone when I am alone. So yeah, I've definitely
seen evidence in the attachment literature that insecure models
of attachment can be precursors to a sort of
sense of longing for other people, and the idea
is the other person is a solution to my
loneliness, and that comes with a whole host of
things you could analyze about whether that's a good
or a bad thing.
Mhm. Uh, COULD you tell us about your loneliness
project? I mean, what do you study there exactly?
How do you approach loneliness there? What are its
goals?
Yeah, the loneliness project, um, which I conducted over
the last 345 years was a large scale project.
It was funded by um. A provider of older
people's living. So it was very much focused on
older people, and, and we wanted to understand what
does loneliness feel like and where is it rooted
for older people. So it particularly was tethered to
the end of life, you know, people at that,
that stage of the lifespan. I think that those
funding the project had the idea that they might
be able to sort of cure. Loneliness in older
people, because I think that's often a, a, a
sort of goal in our society, and I'm not
saying that's a bad thing, but I think it
might be a misguided goal, the idea that we
can cure loneliness. Um, SO the project may have
come from the funder's perspective from that place. From
my perspective, it came from, I want to understand
how and why when people grow old. Is there
a unique kind of loneliness that dawns on them?
And um so it was very much the goal
of it was that, and we explored. What's unique
about loneliness in the last two decades of life?
Is there something unique about it, and I think
there is, there are unique things about that.
Right. I, I mean, I asked you earlier about
uh traits, psychological traits, but how about people's own
circumstances and perhaps events in their lives that might
lead them to loneliness? I mean, do, do we
know which types of events might lead to that?
Yeah, I mean, to give you an example, continuing
what we just, what we just talked about, the
loneliness Project, that phase of life, you know, when
we, when we get towards the end of our
life, there are quite a lot of losses that
we experience and that's one of the big things
we uncovered in the Loneliness Project was people are
losing things quite rapidly towards the end of life.
They're losing relationships. People are dying around them that
they were attached to. Um, THEY'RE losing attachment figures
if you go into attachment theory. They're losing long
term spouse, they're losing identity very often, and that
can be rooted to a job or being a
mother or a father or a parent, they're losing
their body, health and their physical, literally their physical
integrity. And the more people tend to lose. The
more, the less opportunity they have to grab onto
something to make them feel less alone in this
world, you know, because often what we found was
they'd grabbed onto their partner as reassurance in this
world that their bodies had enabled them to connect
with the world by walking or in nature or
their eyes through poetry or books. And as these
things deteriorate, we, we found quite A striking finding
that clearly you're losing things that help you feel
less alone in the world at that stage of
life quite rapidly. And a lot of older people's
loneliness stemmed from this sort of onslaught of losses
that occur at that particular phase of life. And
I think that's an example of a place in
the lifespan where particular things happen to us in
particular ways that create a particular shade of loneliness,
um, that's perhaps unique to that point in the
lifespan, whereas at other places and spaces in the
lifespan. Yes, of course we lose things, but not
quite in the same way as at the end,
if you see what I mean. So that's one
example in answer to your question of of how
there can be quite unique parts of the lifespan
if you take a lifespan perspective, um, that make
loneliness, or they paint a particular shade of loneliness,
whereas other phases of the lifespan, it might be
very different things, you know. Yeah.
Yeah. So, uh, so, I mean, since you're studying
loneliness and you have this project, why does loneliness
matter? Why should people care about loneliness?
Well, I think if you listen to the rhetoric
and the discourse about loneliness. The dominant idea about
loneliness right now is that it's some, I think
we've medicalized the concept. So we live, I think
we live in a world where we're quite quick
now to medicalize and pathologize a psychological state. So
I think the dominant message about loneliness right now
is we need to cure it. There's often these
campaigns to end all loneliness, um, or. Cure loneliness,
somehow get rid of it. And so I think
one way of thinking about it is it matters
because it's like a health risk. You know, it
matters because, and I've heard literally people talking about
the equivalent of loneliness is the equivalent of smoking
so many cigarettes a day, you know, you get
those kind of health, health related alarmist measures or
messages about loneliness. I'm not. I, I'm not in
that camp. Um, I, I don't put myself in
that ballpark. My own idea about loneliness is that
I think it's probably, uh, there was a psychologist
James Hillman. He said that He thinks that loneliness
is an inevitable part of being alive, um, and
at some point in your life as a human
in your journey, it's an inevitability that most humans
will encounter loneliness. He said we need to think
very carefully about what our reaction to loneliness, therefore
is. Is it to immediately seek to get rid
of it as soon as we feel it, encounter
it or understand it, or should we be more
concerned with seeing loneliness as an inevitable part of
human life that might even have a value in
some way, shape or form, and maybe. Is trying
to tell us something or maybe is quite an
appropriate part of our journey at certain points. Um,
I would see it as the latter. And so
I, I think that for me, we should care
about loneliness because. It's an inevitable part of our
growth as a human being, and on the other
side of the desert of loneliness sometimes is a
new version of us. I've often seen that in
people, you know, the transition from a divorce or
the end of a relationship or the end of
a particular part of your life where you when
endings happen, loneliness often happens. And but at the
other side of it is often an essentially evolved
version of you. And I think seeing loneliness more
as, how can I relate to it is a
much healthier way to set the concept up than
how can we get rid of it? It's terrible,
it's an illness, let's cure it kind of idea.
So there are different ways of thinking about it,
but I think the dominant one. Yeah, the moment
it's definitely, it's terrible. It's a blight on our
society. It's a, it's a health risk, it's a
medical risk. Let's see it as that and cure
it like a disease. I don't, I don't see
it that way. I'm not saying it can't be
brutal and it isn't tethered to suffering. But I
think there's a danger in saying that it's an
illness or a disease or a pathology or something
we should fight and battle. I'm not in that
ballpark. So I think we should care about it
for one, simply in the sense that we need
to get right what we're talking about and how
we talk about it and how we think about
it.
So tell us more about that bit about loneliness
being or uh in uh or that it can
be, or it can contribute to our growth as
human beings. In what ways can it do that?
Sure. Well, you know that you can go back
to, there's an old poem by Rumi, um, you
know, a really ancient poem by Rumi called The
Guest House, where he says that, I don't know
if you know it, but this poem, paraphrasing it,
he suggests that we should think about being human
as a guest house. Every day a new guest
arrives at the door. It might be sadness, it
might be love, it might be joy, it might
be loneliness, but he argues that we should treat
each one of those guests with equal respect, because
if we, if we invite them in and allow
them to sit down, they may well have something
to offer us now. What that might be for
loneliness is a really important thing to think about,
right? What, what does loneliness have to offer us?
Well, As I said to you earlier, talking to
the old woman who, like all of the other
people that I'd spoken to in the particular retirement
home I went into this particular year. Was feeling
very lonely. Talking to her though, she. She saw
her loneliness as, well, why, why wouldn't I feel
lonely if I've lost my husband, my job? I'm
not a mother anymore. A part of my life,
a part, a version of me has finished, and
you don't just wake up the next morning as
a new version of you. You have to go
through a period of transition, uh, a period of
grief. It's painful. I've lost things. I long for
those things again. In a way, grief is loneliness
in many ways. The way that that woman saw
it, for example, was that I've got to pass
through this period. And as I pass through it,
I'm becoming a new version of me. And loneliness
is simply the symbol or the thing I have
to pass through, the psychological state I have to
encounter in order to go through transition. Transition isn't
always easy, it's sometimes painful. And for her, it
was seen as. Not just this horrible feeling I
need to get rid of, but something I have
to pass through a desert I have to cross,
a transition period I have to go through. No,
I'm not saying everybody manages to see it that
way because they don't, and it's the people that
don't see it that way that really struggle. So
in some ways, perspective about it. I think change
is the very essence of, of how you see
loneliness and what you think it might be doing
to you or bringing you. So I would, I
would think, and I would argue that it's possible.
I'm not saying it's easy to do it, but
loneliness has things to offer us. It may well
be a signifier that you have, you're at the
end of one point at the beginning of another,
for example. It can be that.
Right. Uh, CAN one feel lonely even if he
or she has relationships? I mean, I'm asking you
that because many times we hear about the, the
so-called loneliness epidemic and people bring to the table.
Statistics like the percentage of people who report having
no close friends and things like that. So, but,
but can people feel lonely even if they have
relationships?
Yes. And I think sometimes, and this is where
you get to that, um, what I was saying
at the beginning that you've got to really dig
deep sometimes to get to the essence of what
someone's loneliness might mean. And when I've talked to
people who. Who have many relationships around them, even
like a, a marriage where they spend most of
their time with their partner. But still feel very
lonely. What that often can be about is they
feel lonely because they hide huge versions of themselves
from their partner. So even though they, they see
their partner every single day, there's a big part
of them that they don't show their partner, even
in some cases, a big part of them that
doesn't even love their partner anymore, doesn't feel seen
by their partner, wishes they weren't in this relationship,
but cannot show that part of themselves. It's a
deep, deep buried side of them. And it's that
deep buried side of them that feels lonely, because
it is a loan. It's not in the world,
it's not being shown. They're, they're acting to their
partner, that they're showing a version of themselves. So
often people can feel alone in a crowd. Because
they're not seen by that crowd, um, they basically
are acting and pretending they're wearing a mask, and
when you wear a mask, the person behind the
mask might feel incredibly alone because they are not
seen. So in some cases where loneliness seems to
be in someone's psyche. And they have lots of
apparently close relationships. The loneliness can be connected to
the fact that actually those relationships are not genuine
enough or allowing them to feel seen enough. You
feel invisible and relationships can often make you feel
invisible. They can be the source of that. So
I often also will say that. Again, it's a
sort of default saying that the solution to loneliness
is always other people. They're frequently the cause of
it too. They can be the cause of it,
not saying they always are, but they can be.
So again, we have to be very careful to
try to understand that some people's loneliness, yeah. It's
rooted to their relationships, um, literally, the reason for
it can be that they don't know how to
be seen in relationships, don't feel seen. Lonely children
very often are invisible within the family, for example.
Yeah. And I mean, uh, going back to what
I mentioned in a, a minute ago in regards
to the loneliness epidemic and the kinds of statistics
people collect to study it. Do you think that
just uh simply knowing that some people have no
or report having no close friends is enough to
determine that they are lonely?
Not for me, no. Uh, AND that's why I
always have. Some skepticism about the sort of large
scale cross-sectional studies of how many people feel lonely,
and like you say, and how many people have
close friends, etc. ETC. For me, that tells us
very, very little. Um, AND as, as I say,
I think loneliness can only be appreciated fully when
you really dig deep into a person's psyche. Yeah,
because absolutely having no close friends doesn't necessarily mean.
That you will automatically qualify for being a lonely
human being. Having many close friends doesn't necessarily mean
that you don't feel lonely, um, either. So, yeah,
for me, no, I don't see those sorts of
snapshots as good enough evidence for a great deal,
actually. For me, I don't see that.
Uh, SO, and what do you make, because earlier
you mentioned about uh medicalizing loneliness, what do you
make of those studies point which point to uh
health consequences of not having close relationships, what do
you make of them? Yeah,
I mean somebody said to me the other day
I was giving a talk on loneliness and somebody
at the back said to me, OK, I hear
what you're saying. But what about the indisputable correlation
between feeling lonely or not having many close relationships
and health consequences, because there is a connection. But
for me, my answer to that is always that,
yes, OK, loneliness and feelings of loneliness might be
connected to ill health and health consequences in some
way, and it is, but that still doesn't mean.
That the solution to that problem is getting rid
of loneliness. It might mean that we just haven't
got a very good relationship with loneliness. So those
people that feel it and have health consequences from
it have no idea how to be with it.
And actually see it as something terrifying, and it's
because of their relationship with loneliness that it's associated
with negative health consequences. We don't know that. We
don't know that that's not true, for example. So
it might well even be a sign that we
don't know how to live with loneliness, to be
with our loneliness. It still doesn't mean that we
should go on a crusade to destroy it, if
you see what I mean. And it doesn't necessarily
imply that. And I think we, that's where I
think we have to be careful because often it
is implied. Yeah, there's a negative association with health.
So therefore, the only solution is get rid of
loneliness. I'm not sure that would be like for
me, that's like saying get rid of death or
get rid of breathing. You know, if, if loneliness
is an inevitability, you don't get rid of it.
You maybe have to learn. To have a healthy
relationship with it, and maybe our attention being turned
to that might be more fruitful for me at
least I, I believe, a way of dealing with
that, that particular statistic that you, you're talking about.
Yeah, so do you think then that perhaps people
who are able to deal well with their own
loneliness might not suffer the health consequences as much?
Yeah, but again, we don't tend to look for
there aren't any studies that explore that particular point,
for example. So the answer to that is we
don't know, but we'd be wise to explore that
possibility. Uh, BEFORE we, before we decide what the
actual conclusion is that we reach, because that is
absolutely a plausible possibility. We've no idea. Well, what
does it mean to have a healthy relationship with
loneliness? What does that mean? Uh, WHO are the
people that have that? Um, WHAT, what, what, how
do they relate to loneliness and how is that
different to people that don't have that relationship with
loneliness? We, we've no idea of all of those
things, partly because we're not asking those sorts of
questions. We're asking. Questions driven by the medical agenda,
which is not wrong, but it's only one agenda.
So the information
we
have is not enough.
For me, no, I think it's not balanced enough.
I think it's very much in a particular camp,
a particular um ballpark, um, and we need a
more balanced and. Broad perspective on loneliness and I
think about when do we learn about loneliness in
our life as a part of our journey, where,
where in society and our own educational experiences do
we really get to grips with our own loneliness?
Not, not very, not very often, and not very
frequently and not in a great deal of depth.
Right. So I now want to ask you about
loneliness in different kinds of circumstances, which is something
you go through in your book and illustrate with
particular cases of uh people, so. Um, HOW about
loneliness in unusual circumstances like during the, during a
pandemic uh as we experienced just a few years
ago during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Yeah, I mean, again. We need to be careful
about in the pandemic. What kind, what, what are
we talking about when we say loneliness and the
pandemic? So the, the, the things that I would
think about when we talk about the pandemic and
loneliness are. One, there was at least the perception
and, and some evidence, although again, it's quite cross-sectional,
large scale snapshots of loneliness that the loneliness increased
during the pandemic. But there was this sense that
loneliness, everyone was walking around living lives that were
not lonely, and then suddenly the pandemic comes along
and loneliness rides into town on a horse. I
don't think that was true. I think loneliness always
existed. I think actually the pandemic. Actually brought it
to the forefront and we talked about it more,
and we had to look at it a bit
more. It could be that the pandemic forced us
to look at in some cases, things that were
already there that made us feel lonely. So a
lot of people that I talked to around the
pandemic time, they felt lonely, partly because the pandemic
forced them to spend. 24 hours with a partner
who they realize they've always felt very lonely with,
but now they're in the same house with that
person 24/7, and they realize, oh my goodness, this
relationship's always made me feel really lonely, but this
is just exacerbated that that truth or forced me
to confront that truth. So in some ways I
feel the pandemic. Actually, as well as just creating
disconnection, which it did do, undoubtedly it created disconnection.
It also exacerbated already existing experiences of loneliness that
people just weren't looking at, or could run away
from, or could distract themselves from that were just
impossible to do that with when you're stuck in
a particular position. So yeah, the, the pandemic absolutely
was a sort of unprecedented circumstance that Probably a
bit like throwing a stone in a pond created
ripples of loneliness in ways we could never have
predicted that were huge, yeah, for sure. And certainly
things like the older people stuff that I've looked
at, it did exacerbate for many of the older
people that I've talked to, loneliness for sure.
Can people experience loneliness after a breakup and in
what ways?
Yeah, um. I think a really common experience of
loneliness is the loss of A relationship that you
at least experienced as the closest, one of the
closest relationships you've ever had, um. Loneliness is a
massive part of heartbreak, um, post, post breakup. It's
one of the the core characteristics of the end
of a relationship is loneliness. One of the reasons
I think people might feel so lonely at the
end of a relationship can be, and there's a,
a psychoanalyst who used to say that in a
way, every relationship is completely unique. You know, in
the sense that it's like an abstract painting, you
and that person create some sort of love or
connection that nobody else has ever had exactly the
same as that relationship before and will never have
again. So you've lost something completely unique in in
many senses, even though your mom and dad might
say, yeah, I know what that's like. I broke
up with someone when I was 15. They they
didn't break up with that person and they weren't
you and they didn't have that relationship. What that
psychoanalyst argued was, you've lost something completely inimitable, um,
completely impossible to replicate. You'll never have it again.
And nor will anybody else. And the loneliness in
that is, therefore, nobody can ever understand that, if
you see what I mean, because no one's ever
been there. You know, you walked a part of
the desert, no one else ever did. So there's
a complete loneliness in that no one knows what
this is like, no one. And I think one
of the painful bits of heartbreak is the loneliness
of that truth. Nobody knows, and we'll ever know
what this was like. And I think people are
often driven to sort of try to communicate what
they've lost, the uniqueness of that through art or
poetry or writing or some way of expressing what
they've lost. But there is a loneliness in loss
and grief, not that that's true also of losing
a partner through death, um, that there is a
uniqueness to what you lost that makes it very,
very isolated and lonely.
And also I would imagine particularly so because it
must be very frustrating when we hear from other
people that they've gone through the same because it's
not actually exactly the same,
exactly that, yeah. And so there's a sort of
bittersweetness to that person trying to comfort you, but
at the same time, they haven't been in, in
that part of the desert that you're in because
no one can be. And and in a way
that's part of the existential reality of being human
and loving someone. It's every time you love, you
are sort of surrendering to something completely unique.
Right. Uh, HOW about loneliness after losing a loved
one? Because I would imagine that, uh, I mean,
death itself, uh, it's very, it's very definitive. I
mean, there's no turning back, so it's basically losing
someone forever. Uh, WHAT kind of effect might that
have on people?
Yeah, I mean, clearly, grief is an incredibly lonely
experience, and I do, as I said when I
talked to people in the loneliness Project. Who were
at that phase of life where losing a partner
was very common. I think maybe quite 50 or
60% of our of our participants had lost in
very recent years the person they had loved quite
frequently for a very long time, you know, older
people often had been together for 50 years, 40
years, 30 years. And some of the things that
struck me, you know, when you start uncovering, well,
what exactly have you lost? Um, CLEARLY they've lost
that person and the unique relationship in the same
way we just talked about with heartbreak. But it
was also little things like, I always remember touch
was a really important one. So intimate touch was
a big one that people had lost, and many
older people had, would say to me, I realized
very abruptly when my husband or wife died. That
that was the only place that I had physical
touch anymore with another human being. And I might,
I'm even including sexual touch, in that, you know,
and so a lot of older people felt like
a really clear realization of how important physical touch
is in relation to the alleviation of um, of
loneliness, that sort of physical sense that I'm not
alone, that reassurance of just being touched or held.
Or having somebody touch you in a way that
you can feel they love you. And that's not
felt. It's not. Yeah, so I think um. On
one level, at that at that end of the
spectrum, grief definitely connected to um. Things like touch.
Um, IT also left people, I think grief also
leaves you, I don't think there's a distinction here
between heartbreak and death, actually they're quite similar. It
leaves Gives you having to become a new version
of you. You know, you're never gonna be the
same version of you that you were with that
person. It's like you grew roots with each other.
You sort of shaped each other, shaped yourselves around
each other. And you are going to have to
somehow re-exist in this world as a sort of
version 2 or version 3 or version 4 of
yourself. And in a way, you die, a bit
of you dies when their relationship dies. And there's
a real loneliness in that, that, that I, I
remember feeling almost vicariously through the people that I
would talk to. um. How lonely and difficult that
was for them to reinvent themselves in the world.
Who am I gonna be without this man or
this woman, uh, that I loved for all of
these years. Uh, THAT was incredibly difficult for them
and incredibly lonely, but you can't sidestep that. There's
no way around it. They had to navigate that.
Some of them were still doing it, some of
them didn't know how to do it. Um. And
there's no guidebook for that.
Yeah. But I mean, this sort of loss that
we experience, a permanent loss and the uniqueness of
uh particular kinds of relationships which you were talking
about earlier applied to romantic relationships. Uh, IT'S also
true for other sort of, other sorts of close
relationships, like a relationship with a father, a mother,
a brother or a sister, a close friend. We
can also experience permanent loss from those kinds of
relationships, right?
Yes, I, I, I think you could argue that
the very same sort of concepts would apply to
those sorts of losses too. They are unique. Yeah,
every time you lose something unique, which in a
way, every human relationship kind of is, um, you
are losing something that is completely irreplaceable and unique,
and there is something very lonely about that. Um,
AS I said, because nobody else quite knows what
that loss. Really means. They know what a similar
loss for them might mean, but it's not the
same one. So there's always a sort of distance
between you and them by virtue of that. The
fact that they, they can't be in my shoes
here they can't be. Yeah.
So you've already told us a little bit about
this earlier, but uh what, in what ways can
people experience loneliness in old age?
Yeah, as I said, I think that the ways
that we commonly found loneliness to Manifest in old
age. It was quite simply that people had by
old age, very defined ways that they connected to
the world. And that would usually be through their
spouse. There's something they connect to outside of themselves.
It was usually their spouse. Or it might have
been, even if it's something like nature, that you,
you can feel, I, I think most people know
what I mean when I say you can feel
a sense of connection when you're, when you're in
nature sometimes, you know, with, with the mountains or
the trees or the sky. It could be through
reading or literature or art. It could be through
your identity and your job, because people, people need
you because of the fact that you're an expert
in something, whatever that might be. But the older
you get and the more you lose all of
those things, the less you've got those things to
rely on as a kind of um. As a,
as a sense that you're connected to something outside
of you. So it is like old age does,
and I think it's quite inevitable that the longer
we live, the more likely we'll lose a lot
of the things and the tools and the mechanisms
we have in place to connect to the world
outside us. And, and we definitely found in our
study that older people we talked to either had
lost those things and were still really in the
middle of. A sense of loneliness in the world
around, well, how on earth do I exist without
those things? Or they were afraid of those things
of being lost. They were, they were realizing, oh
my goodness, my husband's ill. He's only got another
year. What on earth am I going to do
in the world without him? So old age was
quite unique in that it created all of these
um. These losses. I, I know some philosophers argue
they think that maybe. That's a that's a necessity
in that you've got to let go of this
world before you move on to whatever the next
one is. Um, AND so maybe there's an inevitable
painful letting go of all the things that you
were tethered to, tied to, connected to in this
world. Whereas other psychologists have argued, no, maybe you
still can, you can lose all those things, and
then another version of you will emerge like a
butterfly out of a chrysalis in another two years.
And I have seen some older people sort of
they're reborn after all of that, as though another
version of them having another, another round. So how
we, how we conceptualize that, I'm not sure, but
definitely there was a sense in older age that
you can't avoid all of those losses. Eventually, and
They are likely to give rise to a pretty
powerful sense of disconnection and loneliness that you're gonna
feel. You're gonna feel that. Right.
Do people experience loneliness in retirement homes?
Yeah. Um. And the funny, the funny thing about
the loneliness Project was that our, our funder was
a sort of provider of retirement homes, which is
a popular phenomenon in the West at the moment.
You know, retirement homes are a big thing. And
one of the things I think that they felt
they could do was create spaces where old people
would never feel lonely. You know, they thought, well,
if you come and live here, you'll always have
neighbors, people in the same space as you, um.
We, you won't feel lonely, but I think that
was a marketing ploy, if I'm honest. I feel
like it's a sort of way to sell to
someone, a utopian life. It's like if you open
these gates and you come inside, everything's wonderful and
there's no realities of being human, like loneliness anymore.
That was not true though, for us. I think
you, like I said, the losses that we are
talking about. Can't be avoided by retirement communities. They
don't protect you from losing your spouse. They don't
protect you from losing your identity. They don't protect
you from your body deteriorating so that you can't
do the things you used to do. They can't
protect you from those things. Yes, they can provide
you with. Neighbors who are in the same boat,
they can provide you with yoga classes and gyms
and libraries and communal eating. They can provide you
with that, but that doesn't compensate for the unique
losses that you've experienced. You've still got to go
through the desert, so to speak, and that's what
I tended to find with all of the older
people that I talked to. Yeah, maybe those things
are. Positives in people's lives, but they don't replace
or cure or compensate for the kind of loneliness
that people are experiencing in later life. And I'm
not even sure they, they should, they should. I
don't think those things can be replaced. They can't.
How about uh loneliness that people experience when they're
confronted with, I guess, the ultimate kind of loss
that is uh themselves dying. I mean, when they
know that their life is coming to an end,
do they experience a special kind of loneliness there?
Yeah, I do think that um And again, when
I talked to older people who Who seem to
feel, even when they're not terminally ill or anything,
they seem to feel like death is more imminent,
as in they they're closer to it maybe because
they're older. There was a marked difference in how
people seem to. Handle the the fact that death
might be on the horizon, and I suppose for
all of us it's on the horizon, but they,
you know what I mean with older people. Some
older people were terrified of that um of that
prospect. The idea that they're going to die and
how that's going to happen and um. What that
means for them was incredibly isolating, whereas other people
seemed to feel like, and it often tended to
be religion, that seemed to be for some people
the real comfort in relation to this. I I
tended to find that those who have a strong,
strong belief that death is not the end. Um,
DIDN'T feel like. It was something to be afraid
of or that they were, it didn't even make
them feel that lonely, I think. So I think
that, that partly connected to, to the, in the
people I talked to, to belief, um, around what's
going to happen after death. And, and is death
the end or is it a transition? Um IS
death gonna mean I'm connected again? Some people really
believed. I think in death, I'll be more connected
than I've ever been. Others didn't believe that.
Uh, ARE there circumstances where people, uh, isolate themselves
voluntarily? I mean, they, where they seek isolation for
some reason.
Yeah, um, and that can be. Well, often that
can be, it's certainly people I have talked to,
I might, the people will isolate themselves because being
in the world makes them feel more alienated than
being out of it. So. WHETHER you, whether you
think that's like two bad alternatives, then they've just
chosen the least bad alternative, as in being alone.
But some people, yeah, it's because the world seems
to invoke in me a real sense of disconnection
because I cannot feel like I'm connected to it
anywhere, and I walk down the street and I
feel like I'm an alien and I go to
this lunch club and I feel like I'm an
alien or I I go to school and I
feel like I'm an alien. It's for some people,
yeah, being alone seems to be the more palatable
alternative than being in the world, because being in
the world is more disconnecting. It's certainly not a
given that that plugging into the world somewhere will
make you feel less lonely. It's not. So, so
for some people, I think it's an understandable response
to not feeling like you belong anywhere, um. And
so being alone feels more comforting on some level,
or at least less discomforting.
Yeah, and can people isolate themselves when they've been
particularly the victims of, for example, social persecution, discrimination,
betrayal, and so on.
Yeah, and I think I guess that's the natural
extension to the to what we've just talked about
there, that you've got to start asking the question,
why do some people feel so alienated by the
world that they live in and the world that
they try to connect to. That's when you get
the notion that, yeah, some people the world just
persecutes. Um, AND actually that was true for many
of the older people that we spoke to, you
know, they, they didn't feel connected to society anymore.
They felt invisible. And there's quite a lot of
research to show that in urban spaces, for example,
older people often feel invisible, persecuted. Not included, uh,
and so they don't go into those spaces, and
they are persecuted, they are isolated from them. So
I do think that actually, yeah, the way the
world is. And how welcoming it is to us
has a massive role to play in that issue,
yeah.
Do we know how and when certain people deal
well with their own loneliness and uh when they
do not?
Yeah, it's a great, that's a great question and
I I think that. My own, my own sense
of it. And I, I don't have like definitive
data on this. I, I'm only speaking from the
conversations I've had with many, many people about their
loneliness. It seems to be that the people who
deal with it. Better, or in in in in
a different way. For some reason or another, they
just have a different relationship with their loneliness. They
just don't see it. As this terrible thing that
they need to. Run away from, get rid of,
hide from the world. You know, when, when we
did our loneliness project, it was very frequent that
we would get to the door or I would
go to the door for an interview and like
an old lady would look around and she'd say,
Are you the guy who's here to talk about
loneliness? And um, it would be like it was
a secret. It was a secret. She didn't want
to let the secret out. And then, because she
was slightly ashamed of it, you know, she was
slightly ashamed of her loneliness. But then behind the
door when we were talking, she'd reveal it. She'd
show it to me. She'd share it with me,
her loneliness. She might even cry about it. But
when she went out every day, she wouldn't do
that. She'd put on her mask. She'd pretend that
she was OK. So loneliness, I think, for many
people is something they've put into what Jung would
call the shadow. It's the shadow side of themselves.
It's something to be ashamed of, to hide, it
means something bad about me. It's not a normal
part of being human. I'm probably broken, I'm probably
defective. If that's what, that's how people see it.
I can't see how you'll ever have a very
healthy relationship with your own loneliness, if you see
what I mean. So what I've found is the
people that do seem to get on better with
their loneliness don't see it that way. They see
it as, well, this is just my time to
feel lonely right now. It's understandable that I would.
I've just lost that person. I, I'm in a
pretty difficult space right now. It's part of my
transition. That might sound like a very simple distinction,
but actually I think it's quite powerful. Now, how
people reach those different spaces, I don't think I
know the answer to that yet. But um, I've
definitely felt in conversation the difference between the two.
And it's, it goes back to the Rumi poem.
Some people invite loneliness in, some people shut the
curtains, lock the door, and don't let it in.
And I think, um, I think Rumi was talking
from a space of wisdom when he, um, when
he wrote that poem. Even though it was thousands
of years ago that he wrote it. Yeah.
Do you think that it is possible for people
to avoid loneliness and uh should people avoid loneliness?
I personally. Would I, if, if someone had said
to me, you have to say yes or no
to, is it possible to avoid loneliness, I'd probably
say no. I think that at some point on
the journey. You will encounter something that inevitably creates
a new sense of disconnection and loneliness. It probably
will be lost. You'll lose something because you can't
hold on to everything forever. Um. And the longer
you live, the more likely that's gonna be true.
Um, SO for one, I think, yeah, I'd say
no, I don't think it's possible to avoid it.
What your second question was, sorry, I forgot the
second one,
uh, if people should try to avoid loneliness,
I mean. Like I said to you, the people
that I, that I saw and talked to. WHO
I think believed they should try to avoid it,
but still felt it, were the ones who hid
it. They then hid it. And what I, what
I also think about loneliness is paradoxically. The cure
or the, it's not really the cure, but the
thing that soothes loneliness most is sharing stories of
loneliness. That's one of the reasons I wrote the
book. What I often found older people would say
to me is, I feel so much better that
I told that story. I feel so much better
that I told that story. I let my loneliness
out. I showed it to somebody else, and that
feels connecting. You know, the idea. And so maybe.
The loneliness is there because through it, it drives
us to connect with other people. You know, it
drives us to connection maybe in some senses, and
maybe sharing stories of loneliness is a way for
us to paradoxically connect with other with other people.
So often I think that maybe. It's there. Um,
AND has potential. I think through it, you can
also empathize with other people who feel it, right?
So I often would find that older people loved
to know that actually the women three doors down
the road feels very similar to you. And you,
you can share that experience as human beings on
some level. So I, I won I wonder whether
loneliness might not be a sort of glue in
some way, shape or form that we just haven't
realized is quite powerful and potent. If we could
see it as more than just a disease or
an illness.
OK, so I have just one last question then.
What can people do to deal with loneliness? Are
there specific kinds of activities or are there specific
kinds of, uh, I don't know, mental ways of
dealing with, uh, loneliness in a positive way.
Again, I mean, the amount of times that I
spoke to people, um, in the course of my
studies, who would say. I'll tell you what the
most frustrating thing of all is about loneliness. When
it's when people say you lonely people can go
to this dinner every Thursday. We'll put you on
a bus, we'll drive you to the dinner, and
that will be the solution to your loneliness. They
would often say, that is not. The answer to
my loneliness, it, it almost felt insulting to them
that even though it was coming from a very
well-meaning place from the people who created these things,
these initiatives very frequently. DIDN'T help people. They actually
made them feel like they had leprosy or something,
you know, some kind of, some kind of disease
that they, and they felt like a, that doesn't
really touch my loneliness because it's not really about
that. It's not just about me having dinner with
a few people on a Thursday or doing a
bit of yoga with some people in, in, in
the same space. It's deeper than that, and I
need the opportunity to tell my story of loneliness
for one. I need to let that out, and
I need someone to want to know what that's
about for me and care about it. That begins
to alleviate that, that feeling of loneliness. It doesn't
get rid of it, but it begins to alleviate
it. But I'd say to people who feel lonely.
Really think about, um, for one, how you're seeing
your own loneliness is a really important thing. How
are you seeing this, this feeling inside you? Um,
ARE you instinctively, like James Hillman argued, looking for
the exit so you can kick loneliness out of
it as quickly as possible? Or could you take
another possibility that if it's here for me right
now, what is it really meaning? What is it
telling me? What's it, what's it revealing about me?
So I'd say one thing that we should all
do is is think carefully about what our loneliness
might mean. Um, AND I do think that should
be rooted in our education about loneliness from the
very beginning. Even in, even as a child, what
is our loneliness about? Where do we learn about?
Are we loneliness literate, so to speak? I don't
think we are, but we can, we, when as
adults, maybe we can at least adopt a critical
understanding, patient approach with our loneliness. I'd definitely say
that would be the first step I would want
to do if I felt lonely, rather than just
head to the doctor. You, you know, who will
immediately take the medicalized perspective on loneliness.
I mean, uh, do you think that there are,
or, or are there any approaches in, for example,
psychotherapy that do not treat loneliness as uh some
sort of disorder or disease and approach loneliness, uh,
in a way that is more similar to your
approach?
Yeah, I mean, I have seen I've seen approaches
where people have, for example. Created spaces or groups
where people simply come to share their stories of
loneliness with a bit like a therapy group in
some senses, but people would come to share their
stories of loneliness, not with the intention necessarily even
of getting rid of the loneliness, but just to
allow it to exist. And share it with other
people who have similar stories or, or maybe very
different stories of their own loneliness. The, the nice
thing about that is, it doesn't individualize it. You
know, you, you get the sense that when other
people have it, they carry it to on their
journeys. You get to hear and empathize with them,
and they get to hear and empathize with yours.
And there's a sort of. A, you're allowing the
loneliness, you're not trying to get rid of it.
B, you're connecting with it. C, you're listening to
other people and feeling a bit more normal because
everyone has it. That kind of approach has it
does exist in some spheres, for example, around loneliness.
I've seen someone in America who does that in
an old people's home, for example, the old people
do that, and he's created his own group around
that. I like that approach. To me, that makes
much more sense than simply going to the doctor
and them saying. Take some antidepressants and maybe also
go to this yoga club or, or, or, or
make a friend with somebody on the street or
whatever. I don't know what, whatever, whatever might be
prescribed. So yes, I do think there are models
we might look at. That would take a different
approach to how we see the problem, but still
do something, if you see what I mean, as
a sort of, as, as uh trying to do
something about it rather than nothing.
Right. OK, so do you have any final remarks
on the topic of loneliness, something that we might
not have touched on during our conversation?
I mean, not really. I mean, I think as
our conversation has revealed, at least my own perspective
on it, is that we've got a lot more
thinking to do. Go back to your very first
question about even what is loneliness. We, we might
think we know the answer to that, but I
think we really don't. It's a much more complicated
subject than the discourse around it sometimes betrays. And
I, I think I'd, I'd encourage us as a
society and as academics. Not to forget that. We
don't know as much about it as we think
we do.
Right. OK, so I will be leaving a link
to your book in the description of the interview,
which is again, all the lonely people conversations on
loneliness and Doctor Carr, apart from the book, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, sure. Um, I think my university, the University
of Bath, that's the university where we conducted the
Loneliness Project, and I think if you simply Google
the Loneliness Project, University of Bath, you can access
a lot of the more, the more scientific papers
that we published, um, around that particular project and
loneliness itself. So yeah, it's quite easy to find
through Bath University.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a very informative conversation, so thank you so much.
Yeah,
thanks, Ricardo. Thanks for your questions too. I appreciate
them.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bortolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.